Saturday - August 1st - the eighth month of the year . As I lay in bed not wanting to rise I thought white rabbits . Some people would say white rabbits before they said anything else on the first day of the month. Reputedly to give you good luck for the coming month . I never did . I just lay there wondering if it was going to be dry day to walk . The nights are beginning slowly to draw in . It feels late summer . I ached as I lay there . My feet ached in a different way to walking . Swimming had been a brilliant diversion but I found muscles I had forgotten about . I wondered what walking would feel like today . Would I return to sore insteps ? Would my knees ache? What about my hips ? I would soon find out .

After breakfast I set off . It felt quite a change to walk. Even if I were doing the same old road there had been a few days inbetween where I did something different . I found myself thinking a lot . Yes my feet were aching . 
A Corn Marigold meadow A Corn Marigold meadow 
A Corn Marigold meadow
Surely it would wear off before the end of my walk . I dont think so much swimming . I count the roof trusses . I count the people swimming . I see who is there and who has missed the session . Walking I found myself just looking into gardens and seeing no-one. No sign of my neighbour nor any sign of man with dog . No viewings booked to see our house . If we don't get any this morning we wont have any at all over the weekend . It ise going to be a long weekend . Time drags now in a way it never seemed to before .

I find myself on a corner . A special corner where the home owner has made his garden into a wildflower meadow. He is famous in the village . As famous as Spiderman was when he ran in the Spring . Earlier in the season the corner was white. Full of daisies and lavender . Today the daisies had gone over and were replaced with a riot of colour . Yellow Corn Marigolds . They were common in the 70's and 80's but changes in farming 
I liked this house number I liked this house number 
I liked this house number
has meant a decline in these lovely delicate flowers . Poppies rich red and blue Cornflowers . I made a mental note that next year I would leave a patch of garden over to wild flowers and try to create my own little wild flower meadow.

Around the corner the trend continued . Another front garden given over to "a treat for the bees". The owner had planted his garden up with wildflowers and placed his sign . Further round another patch of bare soil had been transformed . Pink Corn Cockle and Poppies . Again another treat for the butterflies and bees. It made a welcoming site urging me on with my walk .

Sunday - swim day . Met some old friends again not seen for months. The baths were quiet . The changing rooms empty . The staff doing a wonderful job of making sure that only the right numbers of people are allowed in to swim . They manage segregation and make folks stand at a good distance from each other . Even in the water they police social distancing . They clean and clean and clean again .

We creep closer to holidays but somehow in the back of my mind I dont think we will be going anywhere this year .

Jennifer Jones
JenGog
A 60 something who feels that the world is her lobster, that life is worth living and that you only get one shot at it . A whole new world opened up since we bought Suzy. A different view out of the window every day and the chance to see life in all its glory. And then there is Sion our travelling companion. A knowledgeable sheep who with his Sheep Book of Facts keeps us on our toes. He and his bestest, bestest friend Woolly Mammoth search the world for latrines, roofs and manhole covers. What more could you want out of life? ... full info


Trips
our second trip in Suzy
May 1st 2013 -» June 2nd 2013
FRance, Spain and a little of Portugal
September 1st 2013 -» September 30th 2013
France and Spain
May 3rd 2014 -» June 3rd 2014


3rd August 2020
Jackie Harrison
non-member commentGardens
We have a small wiidlife garden in the front!! It stemmed from when there was a massive silver birch tree that was chopped down as it was dangerous. but the stump was left at about 4'. Its covered in ivy - so I made a small path round it. edged with old tree trunks and it hosts bluebells, primroses.foxgloves, ferns, a couple of lilac trees that are also about 4ft, a budhlea ( dont think that is spelt right!!) a Black Lace elder flower tree ( so that I can make elderflower champagne in the spring!!) a clump of teasels -(they may have to go as too many 'babies'!!) and a couple of hawthorn bushes I have just planted!! I keep trying to get more things to grow but I have transplanted daisies and clover this year! Not very successful with meadow flowers so I think I shall stick with woodland plants!! 4th August 2020 	
JenGog	
Jennifer JonesWild garden 
The garden sounds lovely and the champagne = well what can I say? We have lavender and the bees are all over it this morning. We had two but other half dug the other one up when he did the drive for Gabby. We have foxgloves but the teasel I had last year must have been from a seed dropped by a bird and we have none this year . Got buddleia and also pyracantha (I think ) the bees love it in Spring . Loads of clover in the lawn . Not much else . Potatoes being harvested got too many really . Glenns tomatoes are just colouring up . I love the smell hate the taste . He hates the smell but loves to eat them with a bit of salt on . Yuck . I wonder what a hatred of tomatoes is called . Saw another garden taken over by poppies aand cornflowers this morning on my walk . It was a bit of a surprise . But very pretty . Seems the fashion these days xx